This dissertation consists of results on the fundamental performance limits of statistical procedures in sparse signal detection and support recovery problems.
We first study an idealized model where high-dimensional signals are observed with independent additive Gaussian noise.
Under suitable parametrization of the signal sparsity and signal sizes, 
we characterize several new phase transition phenomena in high-dimensional additive error models, and derive the signal sizes necessary and sufficient for statistical procedures to simultaneously control false discovery (in terms of Type I error, {FDR}, or {FWER}) and missed detection (in terms of Type II error, {FNR}, or {FWNR}) in large dimensions.
%These phase transitions are akin to the signal detection problem studied by Ingster in 1998. 
Specifically, if the signal sizes are above the {phase transition 
boundaries}, we show that several classes of well-known detection and multiple testing procedures can make statistical risks vanish as the dimension goes to infinity. 
Conversely, if the signal is below these boundaries, the corresponding risk metrics have liminf 1 for all thresholding procedures, including data-dependent procedures.

In the exact support recovery problem, we show that the phase transition phenomenon continues to hold under a very broad class of error dependence structures, and for a very broad class of error distributions with light, rapidly varying, tails.
% We note that our study of the strong classification boundary is in a finer, point-wise, rather than minimax, sense. 
Together with our new results on finite-sample Bayes optimality of thresholding procedures, we obtain a fine, point-wise, characterization of the phase transition phenomenon for errors with log-concave densities. 
The key to these general phase-transition-type results under dependent observations is a certain {concentration of maxima} phenomenon known as relative stability. 
We provide a complete characterization of the relative stability concept for Gaussian triangular arrays in terms of their correlation structures.
% The proof uses classic Sudakov-Fernique and Slepian lemma arguments along with a curious application of Ramsey's coloring theorem. 

Finally, motivated by marginal screenings of categorical variables, we study high-dimensional multiple testing problems where test statistics have approximate chi-square distributions.
Phase transitions are established for support recovery problems in high-dimensional chi-square models.
Remarkably, the degree-of-freedom parameters in the chi-square distributions do not affect the boundaries in all phase transitions.
% Several well-known procedures are shown to attain these boundaries.
We also elucidate on the notion of signal sizes in association tests by characterizing its relationship with marginal frequencies, odds ratio, and sample sizes in $2\times2$ contingency tables. 
This allows us to illustrate an interesting manifestation of the phase transition phenomena in % \ac{GWAS},
genome-wide association studies (GWAS), 
and explain some long-standing empirical observations on the discoverability of signals in GWAS.
As an auxiliary result, we show that, perhaps surprisingly, given total sample sizes, balanced designs in such association studies rarely deliver optimal power. % for detecting rare genetic variants with high odds ratios.
We provide explicit formulas for power calculations, as well as software tools for finding the optimal study designs.
% The phase transition phenomena is demonstrated with numerical simulations, and with empirical evidence from GWAS.
% data from the NHGRI-EBI GWAS catalog.

